Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the respiratory responses to exercise, altitude and carbon dioxide.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the ventilatory response to exercise.
The ventilatory response to exercise is one of the most striking in physiology:
the minute ventilation can increase more than ten-fold to meet the greatly
increased demand for oxygen uptake and carbon dioxide elimination,
yet the arterial blood gases are held remarkably constant,
and the mechanism is not fully explained by the chemical control alone.
The response has a characteristic time course in phases.
At the very onset of exercise, ventilation increases abruptly,
almost instantaneously, before any change in the blood gases could be sensed — a
neural, anticipatory component.
There follows a slower rise over a few minutes to a steady state matched to the
work.
In moderate exercise, the ventilation increases in proportion to the carbon dioxide
production and oxygen uptake, so the arterial carbon dioxide and oxygen,
and the pH, are held nearly constant — the ventilation precisely matching
metabolism.
Only in heavy exercise, above the anaerobic threshold,
does lactic acid accumulate and drive an additional,
disproportionate increase in ventilation.
So the ventilatory response to exercise is a large,
up to ten-fold increase that holds the blood gases nearly constant:
an abrupt neural increase at onset,
a slower rise to a steady state matched to carbon dioxide production in moderate
exercise, and a further disproportionate rise in heavy exercise as lactic acid
accumulates — a precisely matched response only partly explained by chemical
control.
What are the mechanisms of the exercise hyperpnoea?
The mechanisms of the increased ventilation of exercise — the exercise hyperpnoea —
are incompletely understood and clearly multiple,
because the chemical stimuli alone cannot account for it,
since the arterial carbon dioxide and oxygen scarcely change in moderate exercise.
Several contributions are recognised.
There is a neural, feed-forward component: signals from the motor cortex,
descending to drive the muscles, are thought to send collateral excitation to the
respiratory centres — central command — anticipating the demand and accounting for
the abrupt rise at onset.
There is afferent feedback from the exercising muscles and joints:
mechanoreceptors and metaboreceptors in the muscles signal their activity to the
respiratory centres, contributing to the drive.
The chemical control, though the arterial mean gases are constant,
may respond to the oscillations in carbon dioxide and to the increased sensitivity
of the chemoreceptors, and finely tunes the response to hold the gases constant.
In heavy exercise, the lactic acidosis stimulates the peripheral chemoreceptors,
adding the extra drive.
So the exercise hyperpnoea arises from a neural feed-forward central command from
the motor cortex, afferent feedback from muscle mechano- and metaboreceptors,
fine chemical tuning that holds the mean gases constant, and, in heavy exercise,
the chemoreceptor response to lactic acidosis — a multifactorial control matching
ventilation to metabolism, with no single mechanism sufficing.
Describe the challenge of high altitude and the immediate response to it.
High altitude presents the challenge of hypoxia,
because although the fraction of oxygen in the air is unchanged,
the barometric pressure falls with altitude,
so the partial pressure of oxygen falls at every step from the air to the tissues,
threatening oxygen delivery — and the body responds at once,
principally by increasing ventilation.
The reduced barometric pressure lowers the inspired and alveolar oxygen partial
pressures, as the alveolar gas equation shows, causing hypoxaemia.
The immediate response is the hypoxic ventilatory response:
as the arterial oxygen falls below the threshold,
the peripheral chemoreceptors are stimulated and ventilation increases,
the hyperventilation raising the alveolar oxygen by lowering the alveolar carbon
dioxide.
However, this very lowering of carbon dioxide produces a respiratory alkalosis,
which acts on the central chemoreceptors to restrain ventilation,
so the immediate hyperventilation is limited and the initial response is blunted.
There is also an immediate tachycardia and increased cardiac output to maintain
oxygen delivery.
So at altitude the low barometric pressure lowers the alveolar and arterial oxygen,
and the immediate response is hypoxic stimulation of the peripheral chemoreceptors
increasing ventilation, which is limited by the resulting respiratory alkalosis
restraining the central drive, together with an increased cardiac output — an
immediate but incomplete defence of oxygen delivery,
set to improve with acclimatisation.
Describe acclimatisation to altitude.
Acclimatisation is the set of slower adaptations, over days to weeks,
by which the body improves its tolerance of altitude beyond the limited immediate
response, restoring oxygen delivery and allowing function at heights that would
otherwise be disabling.
Several adaptations occur.
The ventilatory acclimatisation: the initial hyperventilation was restrained by the
respiratory alkalosis, but over a day or two the kidney excretes bicarbonate,
correcting the alkalosis and so removing the restraint,
allowing the ventilation to increase further and the alveolar oxygen to rise — a
key adaptation.
The haematological adaptation: the hypoxia stimulates the kidney to secrete
erythropoietin, which over days to weeks increases the red cell mass and
haemoglobin, raising the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood.
There are changes at the tissue level increasing capillary density and the capacity
to extract and use oxygen, and a rightward shift of the oxygen dissociation curve
aiding unloading. Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction raises the pulmonary arterial
pressure.
So acclimatisation to altitude involves ventilatory adaptation — renal excretion of
bicarbonate releasing the ventilation from alkalotic restraint — a rise in
haemoglobin from erythropoietin increasing oxygen-carrying capacity,
and tissue adaptations increasing extraction,
with hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction raising pulmonary pressure;
a coordinated set of adaptations restoring oxygen delivery over days to weeks.
Describe the ventilatory response to sustained changes in carbon dioxide.
The response to carbon dioxide differs between an acute and a sustained,
chronic rise, because the cerebrospinal fluid and the blood are buffered over time,
and this has important clinical implications,
particularly in chronic respiratory disease.
An acute rise in arterial carbon dioxide, as in acute hypoventilation,
rapidly acidifies the cerebrospinal fluid and strongly stimulates the central
chemoreceptors, causing a brisk increase in ventilation — the steep acute carbon
dioxide response.
If the carbon dioxide remains elevated for a day or more, however,
the pH of the cerebrospinal fluid is gradually restored towards normal:
bicarbonate is transported into the cerebrospinal fluid, buffering the acidity,
and in the blood the kidney retains bicarbonate,
compensating the respiratory acidosis.
As the pH is normalised, the chemoreceptor stimulus wanes,
so the ventilatory drive from the carbon dioxide diminishes despite the
persistently high level — the response adapts.
In such chronically hypercapnic patients, the carbon-dioxide drive is blunted,
and they may come to rely more on their hypoxic drive,
a consideration in giving them oxygen.
So an acute rise in carbon dioxide strongly stimulates ventilation via
cerebrospinal-fluid acidification, but a sustained rise is compensated over a day
or more, as bicarbonate restores the cerebrospinal-fluid and blood pH,
so the ventilatory drive wanes despite the high carbon dioxide;
the chronically hypercapnic patient thus having a blunted carbon-dioxide drive — a
clinically important adaptation.
Pull it together: how does the respiratory system adapt to increased demand and to
hypoxic environments?
I would draw it together around the respiratory control system as one that adapts,
over different timescales, to meet increased metabolic demand and to defend oxygen
delivery in a hypoxic environment.
In exercise, the demand for gas exchange rises greatly,
and ventilation increases up to ten-fold to match it,
holding the blood gases nearly constant;
this matching is achieved not by the chemical control alone but by a feed-forward
neural command and muscle afferent feedback, finely tuned by the chemical control,
with an additional drive from lactic acidosis in heavy exercise.
At altitude, the challenge is hypoxia:
the immediate response is the hypoxic ventilatory drive,
limited by the resulting alkalosis,
followed over days by acclimatisation — renal correction of the alkalosis releasing
further ventilation, a rise in haemoglobin, and tissue adaptations.
The response to a sustained carbon dioxide change adapts as the cerebrospinal fluid
and blood are buffered. In each case the system shows both rapid and slow
adaptation.
So the respiratory system adapts to increased demand in exercise by a
multifactorial matching of ventilation to metabolism,
and to hypoxic environments by an immediate hypoxic drive followed by slower
acclimatisation, with the carbon-dioxide response itself adapting over time as the
fluids are buffered — a control system operating across multiple timescales to
maintain gas exchange and oxygen delivery.
Describe the oxygen uptake in exercise and the concept of maximal oxygen uptake.
The oxygen uptake rises in exercise to meet the increased metabolic demand of the
working muscles, and the maximum it can reach — the maximal oxygen uptake — is a
key measure of aerobic fitness and of the integrated capacity of the
oxygen-transport system.
At rest the oxygen uptake is around two hundred and fifty millilitres a minute;
in exercise it rises in proportion to the work, as the muscles consume more oxygen,
achieved by increasing the cardiac output and the extraction of oxygen from the
blood, in accordance with the Fick principle — the oxygen uptake being the product
of the cardiac output and the arteriovenous oxygen content difference.
As the work increases, the oxygen uptake rises until it reaches a plateau beyond
which it cannot increase despite further work — the maximal oxygen uptake.
This maximum represents the limit of the oxygen-transport system,
set chiefly by the maximal cardiac output and the oxygen-carrying capacity,
and it is the integrated measure of cardiorespiratory fitness; beyond it,
further work is sustained anaerobically.
It is increased by training and reduced by cardiorespiratory disease,
and its assessment is used in the preoperative evaluation of fitness for surgery.
So the oxygen uptake rises with exercise,
by the Fick principle through increased cardiac output and oxygen extraction,
to a plateau — the maximal oxygen uptake — set by the limits of oxygen transport,
chiefly the maximal cardiac output; an integrated measure of fitness,
increased by training and reduced by disease,
and used to assess fitness for surgery.
Describe the anaerobic threshold.
The anaerobic threshold is the level of exercise intensity at which the energy
demand begins to exceed what can be supplied by aerobic metabolism,
so that anaerobic metabolism contributes increasingly and lactic acid begins to
accumulate in the blood, and it is an important marker of exercise capacity and of
fitness.
Up to a certain intensity of exercise,
the working muscles meet their energy needs aerobically, fully oxidising fuel,
and the blood lactate remains low.
As the intensity rises beyond the anaerobic threshold,
the oxygen supply to the muscles becomes insufficient for their demand,
and they supplement their energy production by anaerobic glycolysis,
which produces lactic acid; the blood lactate then begins to rise.
This lactic acid is buffered, chiefly by bicarbonate,
generating additional carbon dioxide, which, together with the acidosis,
stimulates ventilation disproportionately — so the ventilation,
which had risen in proportion to the work, now rises more steeply,
and this ventilatory inflection is used to identify the threshold non-invasively.
The anaerobic threshold marks the sustainable limit of aerobic exercise and is a
measure of fitness, used, like the maximal oxygen uptake,
in preoperative assessment.
So the anaerobic threshold is the exercise intensity above which aerobic supply is
insufficient, anaerobic metabolism adds lactic acid, and the blood lactate rises;
the buffering of the acid generates extra carbon dioxide,
driving a disproportionate rise in ventilation that marks the threshold — a measure
of exercise capacity and fitness used in preoperative evaluation.
Describe the cardiovascular changes that accompany the respiratory response to
exercise.
The respiratory response to exercise is matched by a coordinated cardiovascular
response, since the delivery of oxygen and removal of carbon dioxide require not
only increased ventilation but increased perfusion,
and the two systems are integrated to serve the working muscle.
The cardiac output rises greatly, several-fold,
through an increase in both the heart rate and the stroke volume,
driven by the increased sympathetic activity and reduced vagal tone,
and by the central command and the muscle afferents — the same kinds of signals
driving the ventilation.
The blood flow is redistributed by selective vasodilatation in the exercising
muscle, through local metabolic control, and vasoconstriction elsewhere,
so that the increased output is directed to where it is needed;
the muscle's oxygen extraction also increases.
The pulmonary circulation accommodates the increased flow by recruitment and
distension, with little rise in pressure,
and the increased ventilation and perfusion together raise the gas exchange.
The venous return is augmented by the muscle and respiratory pumps.
So exercise is accompanied by a coordinated cardiovascular response:
a several-fold rise in cardiac output through increased rate and stroke volume,
redistribution of flow to the exercising muscle with increased extraction,
accommodation of the flow by the pulmonary circulation,
and augmented venous return — integrated with the respiratory response to deliver
oxygen and remove carbon dioxide for the working muscle.
Describe acute mountain sickness.
Acute mountain sickness is a common,
usually self-limiting illness that affects unacclimatised individuals ascending
rapidly to high altitude, and it represents the body's imperfect adjustment to
acute hypoxia, important to recognise because it can progress to dangerous forms.
It typically develops within hours of ascent above around two and a half to three
thousand metres in those who have ascended too rapidly to acclimatise.
The symptoms are non-specific: headache, which is the cardinal feature,
with nausea, anorexia, fatigue, dizziness and disturbed sleep.
The mechanism is incompletely understood but is attributed to the hypoxia and to a
mild cerebral swelling, with a role for the fluid shifts and the cerebral
vasodilatation of hypoxia, and the individual variation in the ventilatory response
to hypoxia influences susceptibility.
It is prevented by a gradual ascent allowing acclimatisation,
and may be reduced by acetazolamide, which,
by causing a mild metabolic acidosis through renal bicarbonate loss,
stimulates ventilation and hastens acclimatisation.
It is treated by rest, analgesia, and, if it progresses, descent and oxygen.
So acute mountain sickness is a self-limiting illness of rapid,
unacclimatised ascent, with headache, nausea, fatigue and disturbed sleep,
attributed to hypoxia and mild cerebral swelling;
prevented by gradual ascent and by acetazolamide, which stimulates ventilation,
and treated by rest and, if progressing,
descent — the mild end of the spectrum of altitude illness.
Describe high-altitude pulmonary and cerebral oedema.
High-altitude pulmonary oedema and high-altitude cerebral oedema are the severe,
life-threatening forms of altitude illness, and although uncommon,
they must be recognised because they are rapidly fatal without treatment,
representing the dangerous extremes of the response to hypoxia.
High-altitude pulmonary oedema is a non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema occurring in
some individuals on rapid ascent; its mechanism is thought to involve an
exaggerated and uneven hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction,
which raises the pulmonary arterial pressure and overperfuses the unconstricted
regions at high pressure, damaging their capillaries — a stress failure — with
leakage of fluid and protein into the alveoli.
It presents with breathlessness, cough and hypoxaemia, and is treated by descent,
oxygen, and pulmonary vasodilators such as nifedipine.
High-altitude cerebral oedema is a swelling of the brain,
probably the severe end of the spectrum that begins as acute mountain sickness,
attributed to the cerebral vasodilatation and increased permeability of hypoxia;
it presents with severe headache, ataxia, confusion and reduced consciousness,
and is rapidly fatal without descent, oxygen and steroids.
So high-altitude pulmonary oedema is a non-cardiogenic oedema from exaggerated,
uneven hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction with capillary stress failure,
and high-altitude cerebral oedema is a dangerous brain swelling from hypoxic
cerebral vasodilatation and increased permeability; both severe,
requiring urgent descent and oxygen — the dangerous extremes of altitude illness.
How is altitude illness prevented and treated,
and what is the role of acetazolamide?
The prevention and treatment of altitude illness follow logically from its cause in
hypoxia and incomplete acclimatisation, the cornerstone being a gradual ascent,
with descent and oxygen as the definitive treatments and acetazolamide as a useful
aid, illustrating an elegant pharmacological application of acid-base physiology.
Prevention rests on a graded ascent:
ascending slowly enough to allow acclimatisation to keep pace,
with rest days and avoiding sleeping too high too soon.
Acetazolamide is used to prevent and to treat acute mountain sickness:
it is a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor,
and by inhibiting the enzyme in the kidney it causes the loss of bicarbonate in the
urine, producing a mild metabolic acidosis;
this acidosis stimulates ventilation — in effect doing what acclimatisation does,
by removing the alkalotic restraint on the hypoxic ventilatory response — so it
hastens acclimatisation and raises the arterial oxygen.
The definitive treatment of established illness is descent,
which relieves the hypoxia, together with supplemental oxygen;
the severe forms require these urgently,
with nifedipine for pulmonary oedema and steroids for cerebral oedema.
So altitude illness is prevented by gradual, graded ascent;
acetazolamide aids prevention and treatment by inhibiting renal carbonic anhydrase
to cause a mild metabolic acidosis that stimulates ventilation and hastens
acclimatisation; and the definitive treatment is descent and oxygen,
with specific drugs for the severe forms — a management following directly from the
physiology of acclimatisation.
Describe the physiological adaptations of long-term residence at high altitude.
Those who reside permanently at high altitude, over years and across generations,
show adaptations beyond the acclimatisation of the visitor,
and the comparison of different high-altitude populations is instructive,
though chronic maladaptation can also occur.
With prolonged residence, the acclimatisation responses become established and are
supplemented: the increased ventilation is sustained,
though the ventilatory response to acute hypoxia may become blunted over years;
the haemoglobin and red cell mass are increased, raising oxygen-carrying capacity,
though excessively in some; the pulmonary circulation shows sustained hypoxic
vasoconstriction with pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular hypertrophy;
and there are tissue adaptations increasing capillary density,
myoglobin and the capacity for oxygen use.
Long-resident populations differ: some, long established at altitude,
show adaptations such as higher ventilation or higher blood flow that are
advantageous, reflecting genetic adaptation over generations.
A maladaptation, chronic mountain sickness, occurs in some long-term residents,
with an excessive polycythaemia and pulmonary hypertension leading to symptoms and
right heart failure.
So long-term residence at altitude establishes sustained increased ventilation,
raised haemoglobin, pulmonary hypertension with right ventricular hypertrophy,
and tissue adaptations increasing oxygen use,
with genetic adaptation in long-established populations;
while chronic mountain sickness is a maladaptation with excessive polycythaemia and
pulmonary hypertension — the spectrum of chronic adjustment to altitude.
Describe the oxygen debt and recovery after exercise.
After exercise, the oxygen consumption does not return to rest immediately but
remains elevated for a time, repaying what is called the oxygen debt,
a concept that reflects the anaerobic contribution to the exercise and the cost of
recovery.
During exercise, particularly heavy exercise above the anaerobic threshold,
part of the energy is supplied anaerobically,
and the body in effect borrows energy — depleting the stored high-energy
phosphates, and accumulating lactate;
an oxygen deficit is incurred at the start of exercise too,
before the oxygen delivery rises to match demand.
After exercise stops, the oxygen consumption remains above the resting level during
recovery — the excess post-exercise oxygen consumption,
or oxygen debt — while the body restores itself:
replenishing the high-energy phosphate stores,
metabolising the accumulated lactate,
restoring the oxygen on the myoglobin and haemoglobin,
and meeting the continuing raised metabolism from the increased temperature and
circulating hormones.
The size and duration of this elevated consumption reflect the intensity of the
exercise and the anaerobic contribution.
So after exercise the oxygen consumption stays elevated to repay the oxygen debt —
the excess post-exercise oxygen consumption — restoring the high-energy phosphates,
metabolising lactate, replenishing the oxygen stores,
and meeting the residually raised metabolism;
the debt reflecting the anaerobic contribution and the cost of recovery,
a feature of the response to exercise.
Describe the cardiovascular changes accompanying the respiratory response to
exercise.
The respiratory response to exercise is matched by a coordinated cardiovascular
response, since delivering oxygen and removing carbon dioxide require increased
perfusion as well as ventilation, the two integrated to serve the working muscle.
The cardiac output rises several-fold,
through increases in both heart rate and stroke volume,
driven by increased sympathetic activity and reduced vagal tone and by the central
command and muscle afferents — the same signals driving ventilation.
The blood flow is redistributed by metabolic vasodilatation in the exercising
muscle and vasoconstriction elsewhere,
directing the increased output to where it is needed,
while the muscle's oxygen extraction also rises.
The pulmonary circulation accommodates the increased flow by recruitment and
distension with little rise in pressure. The venous return is augmented by the
muscle and respiratory pumps.
The mean arterial pressure rises modestly, the systolic more than the diastolic,
as the output rises against a falling total peripheral resistance.
So exercise is accompanied by a coordinated cardiovascular response:
a several-fold rise in cardiac output through increased rate and stroke volume,
redistribution of flow to the exercising muscle with increased extraction,
pulmonary accommodation of the flow,
and augmented venous return — integrated with the respiratory response to deliver
oxygen and remove carbon dioxide for the working muscle.
Describe the training adaptations of the respiratory and cardiovascular systems.
Repeated exercise — training — produces adaptations that improve the capacity for
exercise, and these occur more in the cardiovascular and muscular systems than in
the lung, which is instructive about what limits exercise.
The cardiovascular adaptations are prominent:
endurance training increases the maximal cardiac output,
chiefly by increasing the stroke volume,
through an increased heart size and blood volume,
and lowers the resting and submaximal heart rate;
it increases the maximal oxygen uptake.
The muscular adaptations are also important:
training increases the capillary density,
the mitochondrial content and the oxidative enzymes of the trained muscles,
improving their capacity to extract and use oxygen and raising the anaerobic
threshold.
The blood adaptations include an increased blood volume and total haemoglobin.
The respiratory system, by contrast, adapts relatively little,
because in health it is not usually the factor limiting exercise — the lung's
capacity for ventilation and gas exchange normally exceeds the demand,
so the maximal oxygen uptake is limited by the cardiovascular delivery and the
muscle, not by the lung.
So training increases the maximal cardiac output and stroke volume,
lowers the heart rate, and increases muscle capillarity,
mitochondria and oxidative capacity,
raising the maximal oxygen uptake and anaerobic threshold;
the lung adapting little, since it is not normally the limiting factor —
adaptations revealing that exercise is usually limited by oxygen delivery and use
rather than by the lung.
Describe the changes in the oxygen-haemoglobin dissociation curve at altitude.
The position of the oxygen-haemoglobin dissociation curve is adjusted as part of
the response to altitude, and the changes illustrate the competing demands of
loading oxygen in the lung and unloading it in the tissues.
The immediate effect of the hyperventilation of altitude is a respiratory
alkalosis, and a rise in pH shifts the curve to the left,
increasing the affinity of haemoglobin for oxygen;
this aids the loading of oxygen in the lungs, where the oxygen tension is low,
which is advantageous at altitude.
Over the following days, however, the red cell concentration of
two-three-diphosphoglycerate rises in response to the hypoxia and alkalosis,
and this shifts the curve to the right,
reducing the affinity and aiding the unloading of oxygen to the tissues.
The net position of the curve thus depends on the balance of these opposing
influences and on the altitude: a modest rightward shift is generally seen at
moderate altitude, aiding tissue unloading,
while at extreme altitude a leftward shift, favouring loading,
may be more advantageous.
So at altitude the dissociation curve is shifted by competing influences:
the alkalosis shifts it left, aiding loading in the hypoxic lung,
while the rise in two-three-diphosphoglycerate shifts it right,
aiding unloading to the tissues; the net effect,
usually a modest rightward shift at moderate altitude,
representing a compromise between loading and unloading oxygen — an adaptation of
oxygen carriage to hypoxia.
Describe sleep and periodic breathing at altitude.
Sleep at altitude is characteristically disturbed, with periodic breathing,
and this follows from the interaction of the hypoxia with the control of breathing
during sleep, a common and troublesome feature of altitude exposure.
At altitude, the hypoxia stimulates ventilation through the peripheral
chemoreceptors, but this lowers the carbon dioxide,
producing a respiratory alkalosis that, acting on the central chemoreceptors,
restrains ventilation.
During sleep, when the wakefulness drive is lost and breathing depends on the
chemical control, this sets up an unstable situation:
the hypoxic drive increases ventilation,
lowering the carbon dioxide below the apnoeic threshold, which causes an apnoea;
during the apnoea the oxygen falls and the carbon dioxide rises,
stimulating breathing again, with an overshoot, and the cycle repeats — a periodic,
Cheyne-Stokes-like breathing.
The high loop gain, from the heightened hypoxic chemoreflex,
drives this instability. The result is fragmented sleep,
with recurrent apnoeas and desaturations and frequent arousals,
contributing to the poor sleep and the symptoms of altitude.
Acetazolamide reduces it by stabilising the control.
So sleep at altitude is disturbed by periodic, Cheyne-Stokes-like breathing,
arising because the hypoxic drive and the resulting hypocapnia destabilise the
chemical control during sleep, when the wakefulness drive is lost — a
high-loop-gain instability causing recurrent apnoeas, desaturations and arousals,
reduced by acetazolamide — a characteristic feature of altitude exposure.
Describe the physiological challenges of the diving, or hyperbaric, environment.
The diving environment poses challenges opposite in some ways to altitude,
because descent under water raises the ambient pressure,
and the increased partial pressures of the breathed gases produce a series of
effects, illustrating the gas laws applied to the body.
As a diver descends, the pressure rises by about one atmosphere for every ten
metres of water, and the partial pressures of the breathed gases rise accordingly.
Several consequences follow.
The raised partial pressure of nitrogen causes nitrogen narcosis at depth,
a state of impaired judgement and consciousness resembling intoxication.
The raised partial pressure of oxygen, while initially helpful,
becomes toxic at depth, risking central nervous system oxygen toxicity with
convulsions.
More nitrogen dissolves in the tissues at the high pressure,
and if the diver ascends too rapidly,
this dissolved nitrogen comes out of solution as bubbles — decompression sickness,
the bends — causing pain, neurological injury and other harm,
which is why ascent must be slow and staged.
The increased gas density raises the work of breathing.
So the diving environment raises the ambient pressure and the partial pressures of
the breathed gases, causing nitrogen narcosis and oxygen toxicity at depth,
decompression sickness from dissolved nitrogen bubbling out on too-rapid ascent,
and an increased work of breathing from the dense gas — challenges that are the
converse of altitude, illustrating the gas laws applied to the body and managed by
controlled descent and ascent and by altered gas mixtures.
Describe decompression sickness.
Decompression sickness is the disorder caused by the formation of gas bubbles in
the body when the ambient pressure is reduced too rapidly,
classically on ascent from a dive, and its mechanism follows directly from the
behaviour of dissolved gases under changing pressure.
While at depth, under high pressure,
an increased amount of the inert gas being breathed — usually nitrogen — dissolves
in the body tissues and fluids, in proportion to its partial pressure,
by Henry's law.
If the diver then ascends slowly, this dissolved gas is gradually carried to the
lungs and exhaled, harmlessly.
But if the ascent is too rapid, the ambient pressure falls faster than the gas can
be removed, so the tissues become supersaturated and the gas comes out of solution
as bubbles, within the tissues and the blood.
These bubbles cause harm in several ways: in the tissues, they cause the pain,
classically in the joints — the bends; in the nervous system,
they cause neurological injury; in the blood,
they can cause gas embolism and obstruct the circulation.
It is prevented by slow, staged ascent and treated by recompression in a hyperbaric
chamber, which redissolves the bubbles, followed by slow decompression, with oxygen.
So decompression sickness results from dissolved inert gas coming out of solution
as bubbles when the pressure is reduced too rapidly on ascent,
the supersaturated tissues forming bubbles that cause joint pain,
neurological injury and gas embolism;
prevented by slow staged ascent and treated by recompression and oxygen — a
disorder of dissolved gases under changing pressure.
Describe the respiratory response to a sustained metabolic demand,
such as fever or sepsis.
A sustained increase in metabolic demand, as in fever,
sepsis or hypermetabolic states, increases ventilation,
and understanding this draws together the coupling of ventilation to metabolism and
the effects of the underlying process, of importance in the critically ill.
The fundamental driver is the increased metabolic rate:
fever and sepsis raise the metabolic rate and so the production of carbon dioxide
and the consumption of oxygen, and the ventilation increases to match,
maintaining the carbon dioxide — so a febrile or septic patient breathes more.
Temperature also acts directly on the respiratory centre,
fever stimulating ventilation.
In sepsis, additional factors drive ventilation: a metabolic, often lactic,
acidosis from the impaired tissue oxygen use and perfusion stimulates the
chemoreceptors, adding a respiratory compensation;
and inflammatory mediators and the increased drive contribute to the tachypnoea
that is an early sign of sepsis.
The increased work of breathing raises the oxygen cost of breathing,
which in severe illness can consume a large fraction of the oxygen,
contributing to respiratory fatigue and failure.
So a sustained metabolic demand, as in fever or sepsis,
increases ventilation — driven by the raised carbon dioxide production matched by
ventilation, by the direct stimulant effect of fever, and, in sepsis,
by the respiratory compensation for a metabolic acidosis and by inflammatory drive;
the resulting increased work raising the oxygen cost of breathing — responses
important in recognising and managing the critically ill.
Describe cardiopulmonary exercise testing and its use in anaesthesia.
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing is an integrated assessment of the response to
exercise, measuring the function of the heart, lungs and muscles together,
and it has become valuable in anaesthesia for the objective assessment of a
patient's fitness for major surgery.
In the test, the patient exercises, usually on a cycle,
under a progressively increasing workload, while the ventilation,
the oxygen uptake and the carbon dioxide output are measured breath by breath,
with the heart rate and electrocardiogram.
From these, several key variables are derived: the maximal oxygen uptake,
the integrated measure of the capacity of the oxygen-transport chain;
and the anaerobic threshold, the point at which lactic acid begins to accumulate,
marking the sustainable limit of aerobic exercise.
These measures reflect the combined capacity of the cardiovascular and respiratory
systems to deliver and use oxygen under stress — precisely the reserve that major
surgery demands.
A low anaerobic threshold or maximal oxygen uptake identifies patients at higher
risk of perioperative complications,
informing decisions about the suitability of surgery,
the level of postoperative care, and optimisation beforehand.
So cardiopulmonary exercise testing measures the ventilation,
oxygen uptake and carbon dioxide output during graded exercise to derive the
maximal oxygen uptake and the anaerobic threshold — integrated measures of
cardiorespiratory reserve; used in anaesthesia to assess fitness for major surgery,
identify high-risk patients, and guide perioperative care,
an objective application of exercise physiology.
Describe thermoregulation during exercise and its interaction with the circulation.
Exercise generates a large amount of heat as a by-product of the muscular work,
and this heat must be dissipated to prevent a dangerous rise in body temperature,
so thermoregulation during exercise places demands on the circulation that interact
with its other roles.
The working muscles are highly inefficient, converting most of the energy to heat,
so heavy exercise produces heat at many times the resting rate,
which would rapidly raise the core temperature were it not lost.
The principal route of heat loss is through the skin,
by the evaporation of sweat and by radiation and convection from the warmed skin;
this requires a large cutaneous blood flow to bring heat from the core to the
surface.
There is thus a competition for the cardiac output:
the exercising muscle demands flow for its metabolism,
while the skin demands flow for heat loss, and in prolonged exercise,
especially in the heat, this competition,
together with the fluid loss from sweating, can strain the circulation,
reducing the blood volume and challenging the maintenance of both perfusion and
temperature.
So exercise generates large amounts of heat that must be dissipated chiefly through
the skin by sweating and by radiation and convection,
requiring a large cutaneous blood flow;
this competes with the muscle's demand for the cardiac output,
and with the fluid loss of sweating,
can strain the circulation in prolonged exercise in the heat — an interaction of
thermoregulation and the circulation important to exercise and to heat illness.
How does ageing affect the respiratory system and the response to exercise?
Ageing produces a gradual decline in respiratory function and in the capacity for
exercise, through changes in the lungs,
the chest wall and the control of breathing,
which reduce the reserve and are relevant to the anaesthesia of the elderly.
In the lungs, the elastic tissue is lost,
reducing the elastic recoil — a change resembling a mild emphysema — so the small
airways are less well supported and tend to close,
the closing capacity rising until it encroaches on the functional residual capacity
even when upright in old age, causing airway closure,
ventilation-perfusion mismatch and a fall in the arterial oxygen.
The chest wall stiffens, and the respiratory muscles weaken,
reducing the vital capacity and the maximal ventilation.
The ventilatory responses to hypoxia and hypercapnia are blunted,
reducing the protective drives.
The maximal oxygen uptake declines with age, from the combined respiratory,
cardiovascular and muscular changes, reducing exercise capacity and reserve.
So ageing reduces lung elastic recoil — raising the closing capacity and causing
airway closure and a fall in arterial oxygen — stiffens the chest wall,
weakens the respiratory muscles, and blunts the ventilatory responses;
with a decline in maximal oxygen uptake reducing exercise capacity — changes
diminishing the respiratory reserve,
of importance in the increased perioperative respiratory risk of the elderly.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Exercise can raise minute ventilation more than 10-fold yet hold the blood
gases nearly constant: an abrupt neural increase at onset,
a slower rise to a steady state matched to CO2 production in moderate exercise,
and a further disproportionate rise above the anaerobic threshold as lactic acid
accumulates.
Second, Exercise hyperpnoea is multifactorial (chemical stimuli alone can't explain
it, as mean gases barely change): neural feed-forward 'central command' from the
motor cortex, afferent feedback from muscle mechano-/metaboreceptors,
fine chemical tuning holding the mean gases constant,
and chemoreceptor response to lactic acidosis in heavy exercise.
Third, At altitude, falling barometric pressure lowers alveolar/arterial PO2;
the immediate response is hypoxic stimulation of the peripheral chemoreceptors
increasing ventilation — limited by the resulting respiratory alkalosis restraining
the central drive — plus increased cardiac output.
Fourth, Acclimatisation (days-weeks):
renal bicarbonate excretion corrects the alkalosis,
releasing further ventilation and raising alveolar O2;
erythropoietin raises haemoglobin and O2-carrying capacity;
tissue adaptations increase capillary density and extraction;
hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction raises Fifth,
Acute hypercapnia strongly stimulates ventilation (CSF acidification → central
chemoreceptors), but a sustained rise is compensated over a day or more as
bicarbonate restores CSF and blood pH — so the CO2 drive wanes despite the high
level, and the chronically hypercapnic patient has a blunted CO2 drive (relevant to
giving them oxygen).
Thank you. That concludes the station.